CeCILL FREE SOFTWARE LICENSE AGREEMENT

Version 2.1 dated 2013-06-21


    Warning

This contract is a free software license resulting from a concertation
between its authors so that respect for two main principles presides over
its writing:

  * on the one hand, respect for the principles of software distribution
    free: access to source code, extended rights granted to users,
  * on the other hand, the designation of an applicable law, the law
    French, to which it complies, both with regard to the law of
    civil liability than intellectual property law and
    of the protection it offers to authors and rights holders
    assets on software.

The authors of the CeCILL license (Ce [a] C [nrs] I [nria] L [ogiciel] L [ibre])
are:

French Atomic Energy and Alternative Energy Commission - CEA,
public scientific, technical and
industrial, headquartered at 25 rue Leblanc, Le Ponant building
D, 75015 Paris.

National Center for Scientific Research - CNRS, establishment
scientific and technological public, with headquarters
located 3 rue Michel-Ange, 75794 Paris cedex 16.

National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation -
Inria, a public scientific and technological establishment,
with headquarters at Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78153
The Chesnay cedex.


    Preamble

This contract is a free software license whose objective is to
give users the freedom to modify and
redistribution of the software governed by this license within the framework of a
free software delivery model.

The exercise of these freedoms is accompanied by certain dependent duties
users in order to maintain this status during
subsequent redistributions.

Accessibility to source code and rights to copy, modify
and the resulting redistribution have the counterpart of not offering
users with only a limited warranty and to weigh on
the author of the software, the holder of the economic rights and the
successive licensors with limited liability.

In this regard the user's attention is drawn to the risks
associated with loading, use, modification and / or
development and reproduction of the software by the user being
given its specificity as free software, which can make it complex to
manipulate and which therefore reserves it for developers or
knowledgeable professionals with computer skills
in depth. Users are therefore invited to load and test
the adequacy of the software to their needs in conditions allowing
ensure the security of their systems and / or their data and, more
generally, to use and operate it under the same conditions of
security. This contract can be reproduced and distributed freely, under
reserve to keep it as it is, without adding or removing clauses.

This contract is likely to apply to any software whose
holder of the economic rights decides to submit the exploitation to
provisions it contains.

A list of frequently asked questions can be found on the website
official family of CeCILL licenses
(http://www.cecill.info/index.fr.html) for any clarification which
would be necessary.


    Article 1 - DEFINITIONS

In this contract, the following terms, when written with
capital letter, will have the following meaning:

Agreement: means this license agreement, its possible versions
posterior and appendices.

Software: designates software in the form of Object Code and / or Code
Source and, where applicable, its documentation, in their state at the time of
acceptance of the Contract by the Licensee.

Initial Software: means the Software in the form of Source Code and
possibly of Object Code and if necessary its documentation, in
their status at the time of their first broadcast under the terms of the Contract.

Modified Software: means the Software modified by at least one
Contribution.

Source Code: designates all of the instructions and lines of
Software program and to which access is required in order to
modify the Software.

Object Code: designates the binary files resulting from the compilation of the
Source code.

Holder: designates the owner (s) of the economic rights of author
on the Initial Software.

Licensee: designates the user (s) of the Software who have accepted the
Contract.

Contributor: designates the Licensee author of at least one Contribution.

Licensor: means the Holder or any natural or legal person
distributing the Software under the Contract.

Contribution: designates all modifications, corrections,
translations, adaptations and / or new functionalities integrated in
the Software by any Contributor, as well as any Internal Module.

Module: designates a set of source files including their
documentation that enables functionality or services
additional to those provided by the Software.

External Module: refers to any Module, not derived from the Software, such as this
Module and Software Run in Address Spaces
different, one calling the other at the time of their execution.

Internal Module: means any Module linked to the Software in such a way
that they run in the same address space.

GNU GPL: designates the GNU General Public License in its version 2 or
any later version, as published by the Free Software Foundation
Inc.

GNU Affero GPL: refers to the GNU Affero General Public License in its
version 3 or any later version, as published by Free
Software Foundation Inc.

EUPL: designates the European Union Public License in its version
1.1 or any later version, as published by the Commission
European.

Parties: collectively designates the Licensee and the Licensor.

These terms are understood in the singular as in the plural.


    Article 2 - PURPOSE

The purpose of the Contract is the concession by the Licensor to the Licensee of a
non-exclusive, transferable and global license of the Software such as
defined below in article 5 <#extension> for the entire duration of
protection of the rights relating to this Software.


    Article 3 - ACCEPTANCE

3.1 Acceptance by the Licensee of the terms of the Contract is deemed
acquired through the first of the following:

  * (i) loading the Software by any means, in particular by
    download from a remote server or by upload to
    from a physical medium;
  * (ii) the first exercise by the Licensee of any of the
    rights granted by the Contract.

3.2 A copy of the Contract, containing in particular a warning
relating to the specific features of the Software, the warranty restriction and
limitation to use by experienced users has been changed
provision of the Licensee prior to its acceptance such as
defined in article 3.1 <# acceptance-acquired> above and the Licensee
acknowledges having read it.


    Article 4 - ENTRY INTO FORCE AND DURATION


      4.1 ENTRY INTO FORCE

The Contract comes into force on the date of its acceptance by the Licensee
as defined in 3.1 <# acceptance-acquired>.


      4.2 DURATION

The Contract will take effect for the entire legal period of
protection of the economic rights relating to the Software.


    Article 5 - EXTENT OF RIGHTS CONCEDED

The Licensor grants the Licensee, who accepts, the following rights to
the Software for all destinations and for the duration of the Contract in
the conditions detailed below.

Furthermore, if the Licensor holds or comes to hold one or more
several invention patents protecting all or part of
functionality of the Software or its components, it undertakes not to
oppose any rights conferred by these patents to Licensees
successive who would use, operate or modify the
Software. In the event of the assignment of these patents, the Licensor undertakes to
have assignees assume the obligations of this paragraph.


      5.1 RIGHT OF USE

The Licensee is authorized to use the Software, without restriction as to
to the fields of application, being hereinafter specified that this includes:

 1.

    permanent or temporary reproduction of the Software in whole or
    party by any means and in any form.

 2.

    loading, viewing, running, or storing the Software
    on any medium.

 3.

    the possibility of observing, studying, or testing its
    functioning in order to determine the ideas and principles which are to
    the basis of any element of this Software; and this, when
    the Licensee performs all loading, display,
    execution, transmission or storage of the Software it is in
    right to perform under the Contract.


      5.2 RIGHT TO MAKE CONTRIBUTIONS

The right to make Contributions includes the right to translate,
to adapt, arrange or make any other modification to the Software
and the right to reproduce the resulting software.

The Licensee is authorized to make any Contribution to the Software under
reserve to mention, explicitly, his name as author of
this Contribution and the date of its creation.


      5.3 RIGHT OF DISTRIBUTION

The right of distribution includes in particular the right to broadcast,
transmit and communicate the Software to the public on any medium and
by any means as well as the right to market as
expensive or free, one or copies of the Software by any process.

Licensee is authorized to distribute copies of the Software, modified or
no, to third parties under the conditions detailed below.


        5.3.1 DISTRIBUTION OF THE SOFTWARE WITHOUT MODIFICATION

Licensee is authorized to distribute certified copies of the Software,
in the form of Source Code or Object Code, provided that this
distribution respects the provisions of the Contract in their entirety and
be accompanied:

 1.

    a copy of the Contract,

 2.

    a warning regarding the limitation of warranty and
    Liability of the Licensor as provided for in Articles 8
    <#responsabilite> et 9 <#garantie>,

and that, in the case where only the Object Code of the Software is redistributed,
the Licensee allows effective access to the complete Source Code of the
Software for a period of at least 3 years from the distribution of the
software, it being understood that the additional cost of acquiring the Code
Source should not exceed the simple cost of data transfer.


        5.3.2 DISTRIBUTION OF MODIFIED SOFTWARE

When the Licensee makes a Contribution to the Software, the conditions
distribution of the resulting Modified Software are then subject to
all the provisions of the Contract.

The Licensee is authorized to distribute the Modified Software, in the form of
source code or object code, provided that this distribution
respects the provisions of the Contract in their entirety and either
accompanied:

 1.

    a copy of the Contract,

 2.

    a warning regarding the limitation of warranty and
    Liability of the Licensor as provided for in Articles 8
    <#responsabilite> et 9 <#garantie>,

and, in the case where only the object code of the Modified Software is redistributed,

 3.

    a note specifying the conditions for effective access to the source code
    of the Modified Software, for a period of at least 3 years at
    count from the distribution of the Modified Software, it being understood that the
    additional cost of source code acquisition should not exceed
    the simple cost of data transfer.


        5.3.3 DISTRIBUTION OF EXTERNAL MODULES

When the Licensee has developed an External Module, the conditions of the
Contract does not apply to this External Module, which can be distributed
under a different license agreement.


        5.3.4 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER LICENSES

The Licensee may include a code subject to the provisions of one of the
versions of the GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL and / or EUPL license in the
Software modified or not and distribute the set under the conditions of
the same version of the GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL and / or EUPL license.

Licensee may include the Modified or Unmodified Software in submitted code
to the provisions of one of the versions of the GNU GPL license, GNU Affero
GPL and / or EUPL and distribute the package under the same conditions
version of the GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL and / or EUPL license.


    Article 6 - INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY


      6.1 ON THE INITIAL SOFTWARE

The Holder holds the economic rights over the Software
Initial. Any use of the Initial Software is subject to compliance
conditions under which the Holder has chosen to broadcast his
work and no one else has the power to modify the conditions of
distribution of this Initial Software.

The Holder undertakes that the Initial Software remains at least governed
by the Contract and this, for the duration referred to in article 4.2 <# duration>.


      6.2 ON CONTRIBUTIONS

The Licensee who has developed a Contribution holds it
intellectual property rights under the conditions defined by
applicable law.


      6.3 ON EXTERNAL MODULES

The Licensee who has developed an External Module is the holder on it
intellectual property rights under the conditions defined by
applicable law and remains free to choose the governing contract
its dissemination.


      6.4 COMMON PROVISIONS

The Licensee expressly undertakes:

 1.

    not to delete or modify in any way the
    intellectual property notices affixed to the Software;

 2.

    to reproduce identically said property
    intellectual property on copies of the Software whether modified or not.

The Licensee undertakes not to infringe, directly or
indirectly, to the Holder's intellectual property rights and / or
of Contributors on the Software and to take, if necessary, to
with regard to its staff all necessary measures to ensure the
compliance with the said intellectual property rights of the Holder and / or
Contributors.


    Article 7 - ASSOCIATED SERVICES

7.1 The Contract does not in any way obligate the Licensor to carry out
technical assistance or software maintenance services.

However, the Licensor remains free to offer this type of service. The
terms and conditions of such technical assistance and / or such
maintenance will then be determined in a separate act. These acts of
maintenance and / or technical assistance will only engage the sole
responsibility of the Licensor who offers them.

7.2 Similarly, any Licensor is free to propose, under its sole
responsibility, to its licensees a guarantee, which will bind only him,
during the redistribution of the Software and / or the Modified Software and this,
in the conditions he wishes. This warranty and the terms
of its application will be the subject of a separate act between the
Licensor and Licensee.


    Article 8 - LIABILITY

8.1 Subject to the provisions of article 8.2
<# limit-liability>, the Licensee has the right, subject to
prove the fault of the Licensor concerned, to seek compensation for the
direct harm he would suffer as a result of the Software and which he will bring
the proof.

8.2 The Licensor's liability is limited to the commitments made
application of the Contract and cannot be engaged due in particular to:
(i) damage due to the non-performance, total or partial, of its
obligations by the Licensee, (ii) direct or indirect damage
arising from the use or performance of the Software suffered by the
Licensee and (iii) more generally of any indirect damage. In
particular, the Parties expressly agree that any prejudice
financial or commercial (e.g. loss of data, loss of
profits, operating loss, loss of customers or orders,
loss of profit, any commercial disorder) or any directed action
against the Licensee by a third party, constitutes indirect damage and
does not give right to compensation by the Licensor.


    Article 9 - GUARANTEE

9.1 The Licensee acknowledges that the current state of knowledge
scientific and technical at the time of the release of the
Software does not allow testing and checking all
uses or to detect the existence of possible faults. Attention
of the Licensee was drawn to this point on the risks associated with
loading, use, modification and / or development and
reproduction of the Software which are reserved for informed users.

It is the responsibility of the Licensee to control, by all
means, the adequacy of the product to its needs, its proper functioning and
ensure that it will not cause damage to people and property.

9.2 The Licensor declares in good faith that it is entitled to concede
all the rights attached to the Software (including in particular the
rights referred to in Article 5 <#extension>).

9.3 The Licensee acknowledges that the Software is supplied "as is" by the
Grantor without any other warranty, express or implied, than that provided for in
article 9.2 <# good faith> and in particular without any guarantee on its
commercial value, its secure, innovative or relevant nature.

In particular, the Licensor does not guarantee that the Software is exempt
error, that it will work without interruption, that it will be compatible
with the Licensee's equipment and its software configuration, or
will meet the needs of the Licensee.

9.4 The Licensor does not expressly or implicitly guarantee that the
Software does not infringe any property right
intellectual property of a third party relating to a patent, software or any
other property right. Thus, the Licensor excludes any warranty to
profit of the Licensee against infringement actions which could be
due for the use, modification, and
redistribution of the Software. However, if such actions are
exercised against the Licensee, the Licensor will provide it with its expertise
technical and legal for his defense. This technical expertise and
legal is determined on a case-by-case basis between the Licensor concerned and
the Licensee under a memorandum of understanding. The Licensor releases
any responsibility for the use of the name of the
Software by the Licensee. No guarantee is given as to
the existence of prior rights to the name of the Software and to
the existence of a brand.


    Article 10 - TERMINATION

10.1 In the event of failure by the Licensee to fulfill its obligations
charged by the Contract, the Licensor may automatically terminate the
Contract thirty (30) days after notification addressed to the Licensee and
remained ineffective.

10.2 The Licensee whose Contract is terminated is no longer authorized to
use, modify or distribute the Software. However, all
licenses it has granted prior to the termination of the Contract
will remain valid provided they have been made in
compliance with the Contract.


    Article 11 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


      11.1 EXTERNAL CAUSE

None of the Parties will be responsible for a delay or failure
performance of the Contract which would be due to a case of force majeure, a case
fortuitous or an external cause, such as, in particular, the bad
operation or interruptions of the electrical network or
telecommunications, network paralysis linked to an attack
IT, the intervention of government authorities,
natural disasters, water damage, earthquakes,
fire, explosions, strikes and labor disputes, the state of
war...

11.2 The fact, by either of the Parties, to omit in one or
several opportunities to avail themselves of one or more provisions of the
Contract, can in no case imply renunciation by the Party
interested in using it later.

11.3 The Contract cancels and replaces any previous written agreement
or oral, between the Parties on the same subject and constitutes the agreement
integer between the Parties on this object. No addition or modification
under the Contract will have no effect with respect to the Parties unless
be made in writing and signed by their duly authorized representatives.

11.4 In the event that one or more of the provisions of the Contract
would be contrary to an applicable law or text, existing or
future, this law or text would prevail, and the Parties would
amendments necessary to comply with this law or this text.
All other provisions will remain in effect. Likewise, the
nullity, for whatever reason, of one of the provisions of the
Contract cannot invalidate the entire Contract.


      11.5 LANGUAGE

The Contract is drawn up in French and English, these
two versions being equally authentic.


    Article 12 - NEW VERSIONS OF THE CONTRACT

12.1 Any person is authorized to copy and distribute copies of
this Contract.

12.2 In order to preserve its consistency, the text of the Contract is protected
and can only be modified by the authors of the license, who
reserve the right to periodically publish updates or
new versions of the Contract, each of which will have a number
separate. These later versions are likely to support
account of new problems encountered by free software.

12.3 Any Software distributed under a given version of the Contract may not
be the subject of a later distribution only under the same version of the
Contract or a later version, subject to the provisions of
article 5.3.4 <#compatibility>.


    Article 13 - APPLICABLE LAW AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION

13.1 The Contract is governed by French law. The Parties agree
to try to settle amicably the disputes or disputes which
would occur as a result or on the occasion of the Contract.

13.2 Failing amicable agreement within two (2) months from
their occurrence and unless there is an emergency procedure situation,
disputes or litigation will be brought by the most diligent Party
before the competent Courts of Paris.

  CONTRAT DE LICENCE DE LOGICIEL LIBRE CeCILL

Version 2.1 du 2013-06-21


    Avertissement

Ce contrat est une licence de logiciel libre issue d'une concertation
entre ses auteurs afin que le respect de deux grands principes préside à
sa rédaction:

  * d'une part, le respect des principes de diffusion des logiciels
    libres: accès au code source, droits étendus conférés aux utilisateurs,
  * d'autre part, la désignation d'un droit applicable, le droit
    français, auquel elle est conforme, tant au regard du droit de la
    responsabilité civile que du droit de la propriété intellectuelle et
    de la protection qu'il offre aux auteurs et titulaires des droits
    patrimoniaux sur un logiciel.

Les auteurs de la licence CeCILL (Ce[a] C[nrs] I[nria] L[ogiciel] L[ibre])
sont:

Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives - CEA,
établissement public de recherche à caractère scientifique, technique et
industriel, dont le siège est situé 25 rue Leblanc, immeuble Le Ponant
D, 75015 Paris.

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - CNRS, établissement
public à caractère scientifique et technologique, dont le siège est
situé 3 rue Michel-Ange, 75794 Paris cedex 16.

Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique -
Inria, établissement public à caractère scientifique et technologique,
dont le siège est situé Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78153
Le Chesnay cedex.


    Préambule

Ce contrat est une licence de logiciel libre dont l'objectif est de
conférer aux utilisateurs la liberté de modification et de
redistribution du logiciel régi par cette licence dans le cadre d'un
modèle de diffusion en logiciel libre.

L'exercice de ces libertés est assorti de certains devoirs à la charge
des utilisateurs afin de préserver ce statut au cours des
redistributions ultérieures.

L'accessibilité au code source et les droits de copie, de modification
et de redistribution qui en découlent ont pour contrepartie de n'offrir
aux utilisateurs qu'une garantie limitée et de ne faire peser sur
l'auteur du logiciel, le titulaire des droits patrimoniaux et les
concédants successifs qu'une responsabilité restreinte.

A cet égard l'attention de l'utilisateur est attirée sur les risques
associés au chargement, à l'utilisation, à la modification et/ou au
développement et à la reproduction du logiciel par l'utilisateur étant
donné sa spécificité de logiciel libre, qui peut le rendre complexe à
manipuler et qui le réserve donc à des développeurs ou des
professionnels avertis possédant des connaissances informatiques
approfondies. Les utilisateurs sont donc invités à charger et tester
l'adéquation du logiciel à leurs besoins dans des conditions permettant
d'assurer la sécurité de leurs systèmes et/ou de leurs données et, plus
généralement, à l'utiliser et l'exploiter dans les mêmes conditions de
sécurité. Ce contrat peut être reproduit et diffusé librement, sous
réserve de le conserver en l'état, sans ajout ni suppression de clauses.

Ce contrat est susceptible de s'appliquer à tout logiciel dont le
titulaire des droits patrimoniaux décide de soumettre l'exploitation aux
dispositions qu'il contient.

Une liste de questions fréquemment posées se trouve sur le site web
officiel de la famille des licences CeCILL
(http://www.cecill.info/index.fr.html) pour toute clarification qui
serait nécessaire.


    Article 1 - DEFINITIONS

Dans ce contrat, les termes suivants, lorsqu'ils seront écrits avec une
lettre capitale, auront la signification suivante:

Contrat: désigne le présent contrat de licence, ses éventuelles versions
postérieures et annexes.

Logiciel: désigne le logiciel sous sa forme de Code Objet et/ou de Code
Source et le cas échéant sa documentation, dans leur état au moment de
l'acceptation du Contrat par le Licencié.

Logiciel Initial: désigne le Logiciel sous sa forme de Code Source et
éventuellement de Code Objet et le cas échéant sa documentation, dans
leur état au moment de leur première diffusion sous les termes du Contrat.

Logiciel Modifié: désigne le Logiciel modifié par au moins une
Contribution.

Code Source: désigne l'ensemble des instructions et des lignes de
programme du Logiciel et auquel l'accès est nécessaire en vue de
modifier le Logiciel.

Code Objet: désigne les fichiers binaires issus de la compilation du
Code Source.

Titulaire: désigne le ou les détenteurs des droits patrimoniaux d'auteur
sur le Logiciel Initial.

Licencié: désigne le ou les utilisateurs du Logiciel ayant accepté le
Contrat.

Contributeur: désigne le Licencié auteur d'au moins une Contribution.

Concédant: désigne le Titulaire ou toute personne physique ou morale
distribuant le Logiciel sous le Contrat.

Contribution: désigne l'ensemble des modifications, corrections,
traductions, adaptations et/ou nouvelles fonctionnalités intégrées dans
le Logiciel par tout Contributeur, ainsi que tout Module Interne.

Module: désigne un ensemble de fichiers sources y compris leur
documentation qui permet de réaliser des fonctionnalités ou services
supplémentaires à ceux fournis par le Logiciel.

Module Externe: désigne tout Module, non dérivé du Logiciel, tel que ce
Module et le Logiciel s'exécutent dans des espaces d'adressage
différents, l'un appelant l'autre au moment de leur exécution.

Module Interne: désigne tout Module lié au Logiciel de telle sorte
qu'ils s'exécutent dans le même espace d'adressage.

GNU GPL: désigne la GNU General Public License dans sa version 2 ou
toute version ultérieure, telle que publiée par Free Software Foundation
Inc.

GNU Affero GPL: désigne la GNU Affero General Public License dans sa
version 3 ou toute version ultérieure, telle que publiée par Free
Software Foundation Inc.

EUPL: désigne la Licence Publique de l'Union européenne dans sa version
1.1 ou toute version ultérieure, telle que publiée par la Commission
Européenne.

Parties: désigne collectivement le Licencié et le Concédant.

Ces termes s'entendent au singulier comme au pluriel.


    Article 2 - OBJET

Le Contrat a pour objet la concession par le Concédant au Licencié d'une
licence non exclusive, cessible et mondiale du Logiciel telle que
définie ci-après à l'article 5 <#etendue> pour toute la durée de
protection des droits portant sur ce Logiciel.


    Article 3 - ACCEPTATION

3.1 L'acceptation par le Licencié des termes du Contrat est réputée
acquise du fait du premier des faits suivants:

  * (i) le chargement du Logiciel par tout moyen notamment par
    téléchargement à partir d'un serveur distant ou par chargement à
    partir d'un support physique;
  * (ii) le premier exercice par le Licencié de l'un quelconque des
    droits concédés par le Contrat.

3.2 Un exemplaire du Contrat, contenant notamment un avertissement
relatif aux spécificités du Logiciel, à la restriction de garantie et à
la limitation à un usage par des utilisateurs expérimentés a été mis à
disposition du Licencié préalablement à son acceptation telle que
définie à l'article 3.1 <#acceptation-acquise> ci dessus et le Licencié
reconnaît en avoir pris connaissance.


    Article 4 - ENTREE EN VIGUEUR ET DUREE


      4.1 ENTREE EN VIGUEUR

Le Contrat entre en vigueur à la date de son acceptation par le Licencié
telle que définie en 3.1 <#acceptation-acquise>.


      4.2 DUREE

Le Contrat produira ses effets pendant toute la durée légale de
protection des droits patrimoniaux portant sur le Logiciel.


    Article 5 - ETENDUE DES DROITS CONCEDES

Le Concédant concède au Licencié, qui accepte, les droits suivants sur
le Logiciel pour toutes destinations et pour la durée du Contrat dans
les conditions ci-après détaillées.

Par ailleurs, si le Concédant détient ou venait à détenir un ou
plusieurs brevets d'invention protégeant tout ou partie des
fonctionnalités du Logiciel ou de ses composants, il s'engage à ne pas
opposer les éventuels droits conférés par ces brevets aux Licenciés
successifs qui utiliseraient, exploiteraient ou modifieraient le
Logiciel. En cas de cession de ces brevets, le Concédant s'engage à
faire reprendre les obligations du présent alinéa aux cessionnaires.


      5.1 DROIT D'UTILISATION

Le Licencié est autorisé à utiliser le Logiciel, sans restriction quant
aux domaines d'application, étant ci-après précisé que cela comporte:

 1.

    la reproduction permanente ou provisoire du Logiciel en tout ou
    partie par tout moyen et sous toute forme.

 2.

    le chargement, l'affichage, l'exécution, ou le stockage du Logiciel
    sur tout support.

 3.

    la possibilité d'en observer, d'en étudier, ou d'en tester le
    fonctionnement afin de déterminer les idées et principes qui sont à
    la base de n'importe quel élément de ce Logiciel; et ceci, lorsque
    le Licencié effectue toute opération de chargement, d'affichage,
    d'exécution, de transmission ou de stockage du Logiciel qu'il est en
    droit d'effectuer en vertu du Contrat.


      5.2 DROIT D'APPORTER DES CONTRIBUTIONS

Le droit d'apporter des Contributions comporte le droit de traduire,
d'adapter, d'arranger ou d'apporter toute autre modification au Logiciel
et le droit de reproduire le logiciel en résultant.

Le Licencié est autorisé à apporter toute Contribution au Logiciel sous
réserve de mentionner, de façon explicite, son nom en tant qu'auteur de
cette Contribution et la date de création de celle-ci.


      5.3 DROIT DE DISTRIBUTION

Le droit de distribution comporte notamment le droit de diffuser, de
transmettre et de communiquer le Logiciel au public sur tout support et
par tout moyen ainsi que le droit de mettre sur le marché à titre
onéreux ou gratuit, un ou des exemplaires du Logiciel par tout procédé.

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer des copies du Logiciel, modifié ou
non, à des tiers dans les conditions ci-après détaillées.


        5.3.1 DISTRIBUTION DU LOGICIEL SANS MODIFICATION

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer des copies conformes du Logiciel,
sous forme de Code Source ou de Code Objet, à condition que cette
distribution respecte les dispositions du Contrat dans leur totalité et
soit accompagnée:

 1.

    d'un exemplaire du Contrat,

 2.

    d'un avertissement relatif à la restriction de garantie et de
    responsabilité du Concédant telle que prévue aux articles 8
    <#responsabilite> et 9 <#garantie>,

et que, dans le cas où seul le Code Objet du Logiciel est redistribué,
le Licencié permette un accès effectif au Code Source complet du
Logiciel pour une durée d'au moins 3 ans à compter de la distribution du
logiciel, étant entendu que le coût additionnel d'acquisition du Code
Source ne devra pas excéder le simple coût de transfert des données.


        5.3.2 DISTRIBUTION DU LOGICIEL MODIFIE

Lorsque le Licencié apporte une Contribution au Logiciel, les conditions
de distribution du Logiciel Modifié en résultant sont alors soumises à
l'intégralité des dispositions du Contrat.

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer le Logiciel Modifié, sous forme de
code source ou de code objet, à condition que cette distribution
respecte les dispositions du Contrat dans leur totalité et soit
accompagnée:

 1.

    d'un exemplaire du Contrat,

 2.

    d'un avertissement relatif à la restriction de garantie et de
    responsabilité du Concédant telle que prévue aux articles 8
    <#responsabilite> et 9 <#garantie>,

et, dans le cas où seul le code objet du Logiciel Modifié est redistribué,

 3.

    d'une note précisant les conditions d'accès effectif au code source
    complet du Logiciel Modifié, pendant une période d'au moins 3 ans à
    compter de la distribution du Logiciel Modifié, étant entendu que le
    coût additionnel d'acquisition du code source ne devra pas excéder
    le simple coût de transfert des données.


        5.3.3 DISTRIBUTION DES MODULES EXTERNES

Lorsque le Licencié a développé un Module Externe les conditions du
Contrat ne s'appliquent pas à ce Module Externe, qui peut être distribué
sous un contrat de licence différent.


        5.3.4 COMPATIBILITE AVEC D'AUTRES LICENCES

Le Licencié peut inclure un code soumis aux dispositions d'une des
versions de la licence GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL et/ou EUPL dans le
Logiciel modifié ou non et distribuer l'ensemble sous les conditions de
la même version de la licence GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL et/ou EUPL.

Le Licencié peut inclure le Logiciel modifié ou non dans un code soumis
aux dispositions d'une des versions de la licence GNU GPL, GNU Affero
GPL et/ou EUPL et distribuer l'ensemble sous les conditions de la même
version de la licence GNU GPL, GNU Affero GPL et/ou EUPL.


    Article 6 - PROPRIETE INTELLECTUELLE


      6.1 SUR LE LOGICIEL INITIAL

Le Titulaire est détenteur des droits patrimoniaux sur le Logiciel
Initial. Toute utilisation du Logiciel Initial est soumise au respect
des conditions dans lesquelles le Titulaire a choisi de diffuser son
oeuvre et nul autre n'a la faculté de modifier les conditions de
diffusion de ce Logiciel Initial.

Le Titulaire s'engage à ce que le Logiciel Initial reste au moins régi
par le Contrat et ce, pour la durée visée à l'article 4.2 <#duree>.


      6.2 SUR LES CONTRIBUTIONS

Le Licencié qui a développé une Contribution est titulaire sur celle-ci
des droits de propriété intellectuelle dans les conditions définies par
la législation applicable.


      6.3 SUR LES MODULES EXTERNES

Le Licencié qui a développé un Module Externe est titulaire sur celui-ci
des droits de propriété intellectuelle dans les conditions définies par
la législation applicable et reste libre du choix du contrat régissant
sa diffusion.


      6.4 DISPOSITIONS COMMUNES

Le Licencié s'engage expressément:

 1.

    à ne pas supprimer ou modifier de quelque manière que ce soit les
    mentions de propriété intellectuelle apposées sur le Logiciel;

 2.

    à reproduire à l'identique lesdites mentions de propriété
    intellectuelle sur les copies du Logiciel modifié ou non.

Le Licencié s'engage à ne pas porter atteinte, directement ou
indirectement, aux droits de propriété intellectuelle du Titulaire et/ou
des Contributeurs sur le Logiciel et à prendre, le cas échéant, à
l'égard de son personnel toutes les mesures nécessaires pour assurer le
respect des dits droits de propriété intellectuelle du Titulaire et/ou
des Contributeurs.


    Article 7 - SERVICES ASSOCIES

7.1 Le Contrat n'oblige en aucun cas le Concédant à la réalisation de
prestations d'assistance technique ou de maintenance du Logiciel.

Cependant le Concédant reste libre de proposer ce type de services. Les
termes et conditions d'une telle assistance technique et/ou d'une telle
maintenance seront alors déterminés dans un acte séparé. Ces actes de
maintenance et/ou assistance technique n'engageront que la seule
responsabilité du Concédant qui les propose.

7.2 De même, tout Concédant est libre de proposer, sous sa seule
responsabilité, à ses licenciés une garantie, qui n'engagera que lui,
lors de la redistribution du Logiciel et/ou du Logiciel Modifié et ce,
dans les conditions qu'il souhaite. Cette garantie et les modalités
financières de son application feront l'objet d'un acte séparé entre le
Concédant et le Licencié.


    Article 8 - RESPONSABILITE

8.1 Sous réserve des dispositions de l'article 8.2
<#limite-responsabilite>, le Licencié a la faculté, sous réserve de
prouver la faute du Concédant concerné, de solliciter la réparation du
préjudice direct qu'il subirait du fait du Logiciel et dont il apportera
la preuve.

8.2 La responsabilité du Concédant est limitée aux engagements pris en
application du Contrat et ne saurait être engagée en raison notamment:
(i) des dommages dus à l'inexécution, totale ou partielle, de ses
obligations par le Licencié, (ii) des dommages directs ou indirects
découlant de l'utilisation ou des performances du Logiciel subis par le
Licencié et (iii) plus généralement d'un quelconque dommage indirect. En
particulier, les Parties conviennent expressément que tout préjudice
financier ou commercial (par exemple perte de données, perte de
bénéfices, perte d'exploitation, perte de clientèle ou de commandes,
manque à gagner, trouble commercial quelconque) ou toute action dirigée
contre le Licencié par un tiers, constitue un dommage indirect et
n'ouvre pas droit à réparation par le Concédant.


    Article 9 - GARANTIE

9.1 Le Licencié reconnaît que l'état actuel des connaissances
scientifiques et techniques au moment de la mise en circulation du
Logiciel ne permet pas d'en tester et d'en vérifier toutes les
utilisations ni de détecter l'existence d'éventuels défauts. L'attention
du Licencié a été attirée sur ce point sur les risques associés au
chargement, à l'utilisation, la modification et/ou au développement et à
la reproduction du Logiciel qui sont réservés à des utilisateurs avertis.

Il relève de la responsabilité du Licencié de contrôler, par tous
moyens, l'adéquation du produit à ses besoins, son bon fonctionnement et
de s'assurer qu'il ne causera pas de dommages aux personnes et aux biens.

9.2 Le Concédant déclare de bonne foi être en droit de concéder
l'ensemble des droits attachés au Logiciel (comprenant notamment les
droits visés à l'article 5 <#etendue>).

9.3 Le Licencié reconnaît que le Logiciel est fourni "en l'état" par le
Concédant sans autre garantie, expresse ou tacite, que celle prévue à
l'article 9.2 <#bonne-foi> et notamment sans aucune garantie sur sa
valeur commerciale, son caractère sécurisé, innovant ou pertinent.

En particulier, le Concédant ne garantit pas que le Logiciel est exempt
d'erreur, qu'il fonctionnera sans interruption, qu'il sera compatible
avec l'équipement du Licencié et sa configuration logicielle ni qu'il
remplira les besoins du Licencié.

9.4 Le Concédant ne garantit pas, de manière expresse ou tacite, que le
Logiciel ne porte pas atteinte à un quelconque droit de propriété
intellectuelle d'un tiers portant sur un brevet, un logiciel ou sur tout
autre droit de propriété. Ainsi, le Concédant exclut toute garantie au
profit du Licencié contre les actions en contrefaçon qui pourraient être
diligentées au titre de l'utilisation, de la modification, et de la
redistribution du Logiciel. Néanmoins, si de telles actions sont
exercées contre le Licencié, le Concédant lui apportera son expertise
technique et juridique pour sa défense. Cette expertise technique et
juridique est déterminée au cas par cas entre le Concédant concerné et
le Licencié dans le cadre d'un protocole d'accord. Le Concédant dégage
toute responsabilité quant à l'utilisation de la dénomination du
Logiciel par le Licencié. Aucune garantie n'est apportée quant à
l'existence de droits antérieurs sur le nom du Logiciel et sur
l'existence d'une marque.


    Article 10 - RESILIATION

10.1 En cas de manquement par le Licencié aux obligations mises à sa
charge par le Contrat, le Concédant pourra résilier de plein droit le
Contrat trente (30) jours après notification adressée au Licencié et
restée sans effet.

10.2 Le Licencié dont le Contrat est résilié n'est plus autorisé à
utiliser, modifier ou distribuer le Logiciel. Cependant, toutes les
licences qu'il aura concédées antérieurement à la résiliation du Contrat
resteront valides sous réserve qu'elles aient été effectuées en
conformité avec le Contrat.


    Article 11 - DISPOSITIONS DIVERSES


      11.1 CAUSE EXTERIEURE

Aucune des Parties ne sera responsable d'un retard ou d'une défaillance
d'exécution du Contrat qui serait dû à un cas de force majeure, un cas
fortuit ou une cause extérieure, telle que, notamment, le mauvais
fonctionnement ou les interruptions du réseau électrique ou de
télécommunication, la paralysie du réseau liée à une attaque
informatique, l'intervention des autorités gouvernementales, les
catastrophes naturelles, les dégâts des eaux, les tremblements de terre,
le feu, les explosions, les grèves et les conflits sociaux, l'état de
guerre...

11.2 Le fait, par l'une ou l'autre des Parties, d'omettre en une ou
plusieurs occasions de se prévaloir d'une ou plusieurs dispositions du
Contrat, ne pourra en aucun cas impliquer renonciation par la Partie
intéressée à s'en prévaloir ultérieurement.

11.3 Le Contrat annule et remplace toute convention antérieure, écrite
ou orale, entre les Parties sur le même objet et constitue l'accord
entier entre les Parties sur cet objet. Aucune addition ou modification
aux termes du Contrat n'aura d'effet à l'égard des Parties à moins
d'être faite par écrit et signée par leurs représentants dûment habilités.

11.4 Dans l'hypothèse où une ou plusieurs des dispositions du Contrat
s'avèrerait contraire à une loi ou à un texte applicable, existants ou
futurs, cette loi ou ce texte prévaudrait, et les Parties feraient les
amendements nécessaires pour se conformer à cette loi ou à ce texte.
Toutes les autres dispositions resteront en vigueur. De même, la
nullité, pour quelque raison que ce soit, d'une des dispositions du
Contrat ne saurait entraîner la nullité de l'ensemble du Contrat.


      11.5 LANGUE

Le Contrat est rédigé en langue française et en langue anglaise, ces
deux versions faisant également foi.


    Article 12 - NOUVELLES VERSIONS DU CONTRAT

12.1 Toute personne est autorisée à copier et distribuer des copies de
ce Contrat.

12.2 Afin d'en préserver la cohérence, le texte du Contrat est protégé
et ne peut être modifié que par les auteurs de la licence, lesquels se
réservent le droit de publier périodiquement des mises à jour ou de
nouvelles versions du Contrat, qui posséderont chacune un numéro
distinct. Ces versions ultérieures seront susceptibles de prendre en
compte de nouvelles problématiques rencontrées par les logiciels libres.

12.3 Tout Logiciel diffusé sous une version donnée du Contrat ne pourra
faire l'objet d'une diffusion ultérieure que sous la même version du
Contrat ou une version postérieure, sous réserve des dispositions de
l'article 5.3.4 <#compatibilite>.


    Article 13 - LOI APPLICABLE ET COMPETENCE TERRITORIALE

13.1 Le Contrat est régi par la loi française. Les Parties conviennent
de tenter de régler à l'amiable les différends ou litiges qui
viendraient à se produire par suite ou à l'occasion du Contrat.

13.2 A défaut d'accord amiable dans un délai de deux (2) mois à compter
de leur survenance et sauf situation relevant d'une procédure d'urgence,
les différends ou litiges seront portés par la Partie la plus diligente
devant les Tribunaux compétents de Paris.